Checklist analysis

What is the product/service:
1. What is the mission of the company?- The mission of the company is to make the administration and running of libraries easier, more efficient and less physically/mentally demanding for staff. We believe, that this will free up resources, which can be used for community outreach, reading events, etc.- resulting in a higher percentage of readers in the general public.
 2. Who are the customers?- The target customers are small to medium local libraries in need of a reliable and efficient management software for their books and subscribers.  
3. What is our business model?- We recognize that most often our target customers suffer from underfunding and a low number of subscribers. Thus we aim to provide our services at the lowers price possible. Firstly we offer a one year free trial of our software. During that time we hope to increase subscriptions to the library by supporting local initiatives and community outreach. After the trial is over, if the library wishes to continue using our services, they will have to pay a license subscription equal to 7% of last year's revenue (to be paid on a monthly or yearly basis). The aim of this policy is to align the financial interests of the company with the success of our customers, thus we are incentivized to continually support community literacy initiatives.  
TEAM
Founder:
1. Are they focused 100% on the company?- The founder is fully focused on the company with no other sources of revenue. He has sold his car and take out a second mortgage on his house in order to fund the development of the software and advertise to local libraries. 
2. What is the story behind the company?- The founder is a avid reader, who often visits his local library. Over the years he has notices that a chronic lack of funds has led to a lack of new books coming in, high employee turnover (where experienced personnel is replaced by young and inexperienced librarians) and a deterioration of the physical condition of the building. By creating a solution to the organizational and administrative problems the founder hopes to indirectly contribute to the improvement of the conditions and service to his local library and others like it.
3. What will be the salary of the founder?- The founder’s salary is enough to afford food, pay the mortgage and cover insurance costs. Everything else is reinvested in the company.
 4. How much time off does the founder take?- The founder takes one day off per week to attend to religious and family matters. During the rest of the time he is in the office 8-12 hour per day working on development and marketing.

Team:
1. Who are the people working on the project?- The team is comprised of young professionals from all over the world, who the founder met while studying for his masters degree at SRH Berlin. All of them have experience working in the fields of software development and cyber security in their home countries. 

2.  Is the team fully on board with the idea?- Everyone on the team understand why they are on it and the impact they can have on people’s lives by being part of the project. They are inspired and highly motivated to create the change they wish to see in the world. 

3. Have they built something in the past?- All members of the team have experience working in large teams for large national and multinational corporations and small close-knit teams as students and independent developers. 
MARKET, COMPETATIVE ADVANTAGES & OPERATIONS
Target market:
1. How does the target market look like (size, opportunity for expansion, etc.)?- The library management software market is generally divided into two categories: large well-know libraries with a large amount of subscribers and small to middle sized libraries who’s subscribers are mostly older people from the local community. Due to the relative obscurity and general lack of funds the target customers experience, developers and companies tend to ignore a large proportion of libraries, preferring to compete for contracts with the large and well established institutions, leaving the majority struggling to use outdated software or none at all. By partnering with smaller institutions and helping them develop and expand their subscriber base, our company can help develop a large and loyal group customers in addition to getting the first mover’s advantage into a market with a lot of untapped potential. Initially the system will be tested and deployed in the small towns and villages in eastern Europe and the Balkans as government funding for public libraries is exceptionally low and the problems we aim to address are the most prevalent. In addition projects like ours are likely to receive funding from EU regional development funds, which will help further development and outreach. Westward expansion is possible and potentially profitable, however western customers are more likely to be skeptical of new and unproven solutions, developed by small companies, thus deploying our services in eastern countries will allow us to build the reputation and experience required to earn the trust of western customers. 
2. What are the use-cases?- The system is designed to be used by people with the bare minimum of technical abilities. The aim is to optimize it for ease of use by young, inexperienced librarians, who have just started their careers and older career librarians with a minimal experience with computers. By helping them organize and administer the libraries more efficiently, they can spend more time and resources to improve the customer experience and organize reading events and community outreach.

Marketing:
1. How do we advertise our product/service?- As a small startup we have to selectively advertise to the clients who are most likely to need and accept our services. To achieve this we can use some basic statistics to figure out where the need for our system is greatest. Some metrics we can use are: population density compared to the number of libraries in the area- potential subscribers per library, connectivity- how easy it for a subscriber to reach the library (e.g. the conditions of local infrastructure, terrain, etc.), and if possible data on local literacy rates/ number of active readers in the population. 
When the most likely candidates are established- a representative of our company will visit each library in person, as face-to-face meetings are more likely to encourage trust and cooperation than other methods such as email or phone calls. After establishing a partnership with a local library and helping develop a culture of reading in the community- we can use our success to demonstrate the benefits we can provide to other institutions, thus adding more partners to our network. 
Competitors:
1. Which players dominate the market?- Currently the market is split between multiple small players, who offer a similar service. Some examples are- Civica, PeoQuest, Innovative Interfaces, etc. They mostly target libraries and educational institutions of different levels. However, for an institution to acquire their services it must have the funds to pay for it outright. What sets us apart from the competition is that we first help our customers develop the means to afford our services, thus creating a grassroots loyal customer base.
2.  What percentage of the market do they hold?- In 2022 the library management systems market was valued at $249.5 Mn. About 55% of it belonged to North American companies, ~25% to European companies with Asia Pacific, Middle East& Africa and South America competing for the rest (https://www.maximizemarketresearch.com/market-report/global-library-management-systems-market/22516/).  
Competitive advantages:
1. Customer communication- Our customers always have a direct line of communication with us and can suggest changes, report issues or request custom solutions to specific problems at all times. 
2. Ease of use- Our software is developed to be as intuitive and easy to use as possible, for everyone with a minimal learning curve.  We believe that this approach will encourage institutions to adopt out product even if their staff does not possess a high degree of computer proficiency. 
3. Security- As our team is comprised of cyber security professionals, we give special attention to developing exploit-free secure software, which our clients can safely trust with their and their client’s data. 
4. Community outreach and partner development- We believe that the market for library management systems is massively undervalued as a large majority of libraries in underdeveloped countries and small to medium inhabited areas simply do not have the means to afford such services. By helping those institutions grow their customer base and better the quality of the services they provide we can develop and corner a large segment of the market, which our competitors simply ignore and are unwilling to invest in. In addition we help promote education and reading in areas where it is typically subpar compared to larger urban centers, thus improving the quality of life of people and communities, in which our partners are situated.  
